---
layout: post
title:  "Assignment 2"
date:   2021-02-19 16:00:00 +0800
---

Assignment 2 introduces loops. Loops are exactly what they sound like:
they allow you to repeat a piece of code as many as times as you want.
The most basic form of loop is the `while` loop, and all loops can be
converted into a `while` loop.

I will be stating the time complexity of the algorithm in each
question in Big-$$O$$ notation from this assignment
onwards. **This is not relevant yet and you may ignore it**, but will
be in later chapters of this class.

## Question 1: Collatz
In this question, we have to implement the $$3n+1$$ conjecture. If
$$n$$ is even, divide it by 2. Otherwise, triple it and add one.
Terminate if $$n$$ becomes 1. I really don't know what else to say, so
I'm just going to give the pseudocode here.

{% highlight c %}
algorithm Collatz(n):
    stop_time = 0
    while n != 1:
        if n is even:
            n /= 2
        else:
            n = 3n + 1
        stop_time += 1
    return stop_time
{% endhighlight %}

To find the number with the largest stopping time, we need two variables.
One to store the current number with the largest stopping time, and
another to store its corresponding stopping time. We just loop from
$$1$$ to $$n$$, and update the variables as we go along:

{% highlight c %}
algorithm LargestStopTime(n):
    stop_time = -1
    num = -1
    for i in range [1...n]:
        i_stop_time = Collatz(i)
        if i_stop_time > stop_time:
            stop_time = i_stop_time
            num = i
    return i
{% endhighlight %}


### Recursive Formulation
The Collatz conjecture can be implemented recursively. The base case
is when $$n = 1$$.

{% highlight c %}
algorithm Collatz(n, stop_time):
    if n == 1:
        return stop_time
    if n is even:
        return Collatz(n / 2, stop_time + 1)
    else:
        return Collatz(3n + 1, stop_time + 1)
{% endhighlight %}

We can call this function with `Collatz(n, 0)`.

## Question 2: Triangle
This question is a build-up to Question 4.

We are tasked with drawing an isoceles triangle to the screen. We are
given an input height $$h$$, and each row should have exactly $$2h - 1$$
total characters (excluding new lines only).

The easiest way to figure this out is to draw a small example, and find
a pattern. Let's take the example from the sample input (I've replaced
the spaces with `.` to make it easier to see):

```
5
....#....
...###...
..#####..
.#######.
#########
```

In this case, each row has $$2(5) - 1 = 9$$ characters. Let's write out
a triplet of numbers at each row: the number of leading whitespaces,
the number of hexes, and the number of trailing whitespaces:

```
k = 1  ....#....   4 1 4
k = 2  ...###...   3 3 3
k = 3  ..#####..   2 5 2
k = 4  .#######.   1 7 1
k = 5  #########   0 9 0
```

We can reasonably deduce that the number of leading (or trailing)
whitespaces is related to $$h$$. Specifically, it seems to be equal
to $$h - k$$.

Since the number of leading whitespaces is equal to the number of
trailing whitespaces, the total number of whitespaces at row $$k$$ is
given by $$2(h - k)$$. Each row has $$2h - 1$$ characters, so the
number of hexes at row $$k$$ is the difference of the two i.e $$(2h - 1) - 2(h - k)$$.

Using this information, we can determine the number of spaces and hexes
to print at any $$k$$-th row, only with the value of $$k$$ and $$h$$.

{% highlight c %}
algorithm draw_row(h, k):
    n_spaces = h - k
    n_hexes = (2h - 1) - 2(h - k)
    print n_spaces number of ' '
    print n_hexes number of '#'
    print n_spaces number of ' '
    print '\n' // newline character

algorithm draw_triangle(h):
    for i in range[1...h]:
        draw_row(h, i)
{% endhighlight %}

Note that this is how many algorithmic problems are (informally)
reasoned about and eventually solved in code. Solving a problem of size
$$n$$ is abstract and difficult to reason with, so, we think about
a smaller, concrete problem size to play around with the problem. Once
we have a solution, we *try* (we may fail to consider all edge cases)
to generalise it to a problem size of $$n$$, then let the computer
handle the rest.

We are printing to a canvas of dimensions $$h \times 2h - 1$$. Each
printing of a character takes $$O(1)$$ time, and therefore
the algorithm runs in $$O(h^2)$$.

## Question 3: Prime
This question is a build-up to Question 4.

In this question, we are required to check if a number $$n$$ is prime.
You are *not* expected to use any fancy algorithms e.g
ECPP, Miller-Rabin, AKS, etc.

The simplest way to check for primality of an integer $$n$$, and the
one expected of you in this question, is to test all of its possible
divisors. This is also known as **trial division**, and a basic
implementation of it is as follows:

{% highlight c %}
algorithm IsPrime(n):
    if n == 1:
        return FALSE
    i = 2
    while i < n:
        if i divides n:
            return FALSE
        i += 1
    return TRUE
{% endhighlight %}

One caveat of the question is that all inputs in the `inputs/` folder
given should run in under two minutes on the PE nodes. If you had used
this particularly algorithm, you would have noticed that the later test
cases run *extremely* slow. Slow enough, that the last test case ran
for about 30 minutes before I gave up and terminated the process.
Micro-optimisations will not help here, we have to use a bit of math to
speed it up.

The algorithm spends most of its time in the `while`-loop, so if we can
decrease the number of iterations, we can also heavily decrease the
overall real-world running time of the algorithm. A simple optimisation
is - instead of checking divisors until $$n$$, we only need to check
until $$\frac{n}{2}$$, since any divisor greater than $$\frac{n}{2}$$
but less than $$n$$ will need to be multiplied by some real number
$$1 < d < 2$$ to equal $$n$$. Extending this idea further, it turns
out that we only need to check until $$\sqrt{n}$$ at most [^1].

This cuts down the number of checks we have to do, from roughly $$n$$
checks to $$\sqrt{n}$$ checks which is a *huge* improvement. For
scope, if $$n = 9000000000 = 9 \times 10^9$$, then with this
optimisation, we only need to do roughly $$95000$$ checks. On my PC,
the last test case runs in less than 30 seconds using this optimisation.

The question states further that we should not do repetitive work i.e
if we have found evidence that a number is not prime, we should not
continue checking. This is done above by returning $$FALSE$$
**immediately** if we have found an $$i$$ that divides $$n$$.

There are other methods to speed up the function, such as recognising
that all primes after $$2$$ and $$3$$ are of the form $$6k-1$$ and
$$6k+1$$ for some $$k$$.

The unoptimised algorithm runs in $$O(n)$$, but the math-optimised
version runs in $$O(\sqrt{n})$$ time.

### Multiplication is Expensive
If you had used $$i \times i \leq n$$ in your `for`-loop condition,
you probably would have noticed that the run-time is still extremely
slow. This is architecture specific and actually means that
computation of $$i \times i$$ per iteration is very expensive even on
modern CPUs. It's must faster to compute $$\sqrt{n}$$ first, then
check with $$i \leq \sqrt{n}$$.

## Question 4: Pattern
This is a particularly infamous question, affectionately known as the
"christmas tree problem". I wish I still have my attempts from when I
did this class, but I'm pretty sure my solution had around 250 lines
of code and took me 2 days to complete.

The question is confusing, to say the least. I'm not going to go into
the specifics of the question because I don't think I can explain it
any better than the question itself, so, I'm going to assume you have
an understanding of what you have to do for it.

Let's begin with some pre-requisites:

1. We first need a function to check whether a number is prime. We have this from question 3.
2. The understanding of how to draw an isoceles triangle was completed in question 2.

With that said, let's dive into the question.

As evident by its title, the question is all about **patterns**, in
particular, are we able to derive the first number of the leading cell
at the $$k$$-th row using the values of $$n$$ and $$k$$? Using this
number, are we able to figure out all the possible numbers in a certain
cell? What about the cells after the leading cell? It turns out that
many things are linked to the first number in the leading cell, and
the value of $$n$$ and $$k$$.

First, let's draw an outline for the function of drawing the triangle.
We have an understanding of this from question 2, so let's put it into
action:

```c
algorithm draw_row(n, h, k)
    n_spaces = h - k
    n_hexes = (2h - 1) - 2(h - k)
    print n_spaces number of ' '

    // this is new, we print '#' based on whether a 1 or prime exists in that cell
    for i in range [1...n_hexes]:
        if i-th cell has a 1 or prime: // We don't know how to do this yet
            print '#'
        else:
            print ' '

    print n_spaces number of ' '
    print '\n'

algorithm draw_triangle(n, h):
    for i in range[1...h]:
        draw_row(n, h, i)
```

By *wishful thinking*, we've assumed that we know how to determine
if the $$i$$-th cell in the $$k$$-th row has a 1 or prime. Now, we need
to implement it.

The question itself gives some explanations for the first number of the
leading cell for a row $$k$$.

```
Each cell in the triangle contains n integers.

The first cell in the first row contains the numbers 1, 2, ..., n.

The leading cell of the next row, Row 2, contains n numbers between n + 1 and
3n, with an increment of 2: i.e., n + 1, n + 3, n + 5, .., n + (2n - 1).

The leading cell of the next row, Row 3, contains the numbers 3n + 1 and 6n,
with increment of 3: i.e., 3n + 1, 3n + 4,3n + 7,.. 3n+(3n−2), etc.
```

The pattern isn't very obvious from this explanation. Further down the
question, there is an example:

{% highlight c %}
n=2 h=4
   #
  # #
 ## ##
# # # #

k = 1: {1,2}
k = 2: {3,5} {4,6} {5,7}
k = 3: {7,10} {8,11} {9,12} {10,13} {11,14}
k = 4: {13,17} {14,18} {15,19} {16,20} {17,21} {18,22} {19,23}
{% endhighlight %}

We can make some observations from this output using $$n = 2$$.

```
FIRST NUMBER OF LEADING CELL
k = 1: 1    0n + 1
k = 2: 3    1n + 1
k = 3: 7    3n + 1
k = 4: 13   6n + 1
            ^
            what is this sequence of numbers in each line before the n?
```

The sequence of numbers preceding the value of $$n$$ suspiciously
seem to be the [Triangular Numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triangular_number).
A closed-form expression for the $$n$$-th triangle number from
$$n = 0$$ is

$$\triangle_n = \frac{n(n+1)}{2} = \{0, 1, 3, 6, ...\}$$

Using this knowledge, the number of the first number in the leading cell
in the $$k$$-th row is given by

$$
(\triangle_{k-1} \times n) + 1
$$

Therefore, the $$i$$-th cell (starting from $$i = 1$$) in the
$$k$$-th row has its first number as

$$
((\triangle_{k-1} \times n) + 1) + (i - 1)
$$

For each cell, the difference between successive elements is given by
the row number, $$k$$. With all this information, we can finally write
the function that checks if the $$i$$-th cell in the $$k$$-th row has
a prime (or 1):

{% highlight c %}
// checks if the i-th cell in the k-th row has a prime or 1
algorithm CellHasPrime(n, k, i):
    leading_number = ((triangle(k - 1) * n) + 1) + (i - 1)
    numbers_in_cell = leading_number
    for j in range [1...n]:
        if numbers_in_cell is prime or numbers_in_cell is 1:
            return TRUE
        numbers_in_cell += k
    return FALSE
{% endhighlight %}

Now, the complete algorithm is:

{% highlight c %}
algorithm draw_row(n, h, k)
    n_spaces = h - k
    n_hexes = (2h - 1) - 2(h - k)
    print n_spaces number of ' '
    for i in range [1...n_hexes]:
        if CellHasPrime(n, k, i):
            print '#'
        else:
            print ' '
    print n_spaces number of ' '
    print '\n'

algorithm draw_triangle(n, h):
    for i in range[1...h]:
        draw_row(n, h, i)
{% endhighlight %}

---

[^1]: Think about why this is so.
